Revise Install Guide to provide better, more up to date guidance (#335)
spyder-ide/spyder-docs: doc/installation.rst

.. _issue tracker: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/issues

.. note::

>    For most users on Windows and macOS, we recommend using our :ref:`standalone_installers_ref`, and for those on Linux or who need third-party Spyder plugins, which the standalone installers currently do not support, we advise using :ref:`installation-conda`.

Author: > Say why we recommend our installers.

I actually included such in several previous drafts, but I didn't want to duplicate the information in the standalone installers section, so I ended up eliding it in the end. However, I revised it to mention this again (with more appropriate diction).

> Mention other packages because that's important for users.

The specific limitation here with the standalone installers and third party packages is the ability to view the latter's data types in the Variable Explorer (assuming a solution to that hasn't been implemented yet), which I added a mention of.

Otherwise, for non-included packages, users just have to use a separate Python environment to run their code (provided by an existing or new Anaconda/Miniconda/etc installation, in this case), which is what we've always told them to do anyway for years and years now to avoid breaking Spyder, and is the whole point of the standalone installers. This is described in more detail, with a link to our FAQ and How-To video on the subject, at the top of the standalone installers section, and I also include more guidance on setting this up in the Conda section.

>    Linux, plugin and package/environment management support in the standalone installers are currently under active development for future Spyder versions.

Author: I wanted the order to match the previous sentence, where the plugin support (which is the bigger deal there) is mentioned second. Its a bigger feature here, but its more of a nice to have than resolving a hard limitation in the installers like plugin support.

Also, I'm not sure its 100% set that it will come first, we could just add support for selecting custom plugins at install time, add a CLI or simplified minimal GUI for installing plugins before adding full package and env management for arbitrary packages and environments, which is a much larger problem space.

>    Linux, plugin and package/environment management support in the standalone installers are currently under active development for future Spyder versions.

Reviewer: > I wanted the order to match the previous sentence

Ok, I understand now the idea of this sentence. So, I'm ok with leaving it as it is.

> Also, I'm not sure its 100% set that it will come first, we could just add support for selecting custom plugins at install time, add a CLI or simplified minimal GUI for installing plugins before adding full package and env management for arbitrary packages and environments, which is a much larger problem space.

Package management will come first thanks to what Daniel and Juan Sebastian are doing.

>    Linux, plugin and package/environment management support in the standalone installers are currently under active development for future Spyder versions.

Author: Okay, I see. In any case, if we change it here, we would need to change it in the previous sentence as well, and I'm really not sure it makes sense to put better support for custom data types in the variable explorer ahead of plugin support, especially when its not really that directly connected with the package and environment management anyway (as it refers to Spyder's own internal environment).

>    Linux, plugin and package/environment management support in the standalone installers are currently under active development for future Spyder versions.

Reviewer: As I said above, I'm fine with leaving this sentence as it is.

.. _issue tracker: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/issues

.. note::

   For most users on Windows and macOS, we recommend our :ref:`install-standalone` as the most straightforward and robust option to obtain Spyder.

>    For users on Linux, needing third-party Spyder plugins or Variable Explorer compatibility with custom-installed packages, capabilities which the standalone installers currently do not provide, we advise using a :ref:`install-conda`.

Author: ```suggestion
   For users needing Linux support, third-party Spyder plugins or Variable Explorer compatibility with custom-installed packages—all capabilities which the standalone installers currently do not yet provide—we advise using a :ref:`install-conda`.
```

Instead of repeating users again as well as a doubled-up "or", I rewrote the sentence to make it clearer and simpler and avoid the need for that.

>    For users on Linux, needing third-party Spyder plugins or Variable Explorer compatibility with custom-installed packages, capabilities which that the standalone installers currently do not provide, we advise using a :ref:`install-conda`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For users on Linux, needing third-party Spyder plugins or Variable Explorer compatibility with custom-installed packages, capabilities which the standalone installers currently do not provide, we advise using a :ref:`install-conda`.
```

.. _install-standalone:

=====================
Standalone installers
=====================

The standalone installers are our recommended method for most users on Windows and macOS, with experimental Linux support under active development.

> They work much like installing any other IDE, where Spyder can be installed and updated independently of the Python environments you use to run your code, avoiding problems with incompatible packages and broken installations that users often face when doing so within their own Python installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They work much like installing any other IDE, where Spyder can be installed and updated independently of the Python environments you use to run your code, avoiding problems with incompatible packages and broken installations that users often face when doing so within Anaconda, for instance.
```

* Avoids repeating `installation` twice.
* I think it provides a simpler reference (i.e. Anaconda) for users to understand what we mean here.

Author: Okay, though its a little weird to say "for instance" here. I've reworded it accordingly, and also split it into two shorter sentences and avoided another repeat of "installing".

```suggestion
They work much like for any other IDE, where Spyder can be installed and updated independently of the Python environments you use to run your code.
This avoids the problems with incompatible packages and broken installations users often face when mixing Spyder with the (Conda, etc) environments they use to run their code.
```

> The installers include a built-in Python environment with the most common scientific libraries, which can be used out of the box for basic data analysis tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The installers include a built-in Python environment with the most common scientific libraries (e.g. Matplotlib Pandas and Numpy), which can be used out of the box for basic data analysis tasks.
```

Just so users get a feeling of what they're going to find in the installers.

Author: ```suggestion
The installers include a built-in Python environment with the most common scientific libraries (e.g. NumPy, Pandas, Matpotlib, etc), which can be used out of the box for basic data analysis tasks.
```

Fix punctuation, capitalization and ordering

> However, to install and manage your own packages and environments, you'll currently need to use an external Python installation (such as `Anaconda`_, `Miniconda`_, `Miniforge/Mambaforge`_, `WinPython`_ or `Python.org <Python_>`__) with Spyder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, to install and manage your own packages and environments, you'll currently need to use an external Python installation (such as `Anaconda`_, `Miniconda`_, `Miniforge/Mambaforge`_, `WinPython`_ or `Python.org <Python_>`__), which needs to be connected to our installers.
```

I think `with Spyder` would lead people to install Spyder on that installation, which we know is not necessary.

Author: ```suggestion
However, to manage your own packages and environments, you'll currently need to connect an external Python distribution (such as `Anaconda`_, `Miniconda`_, `Miniforge/Mambaforge`_, `WinPython`_ or `Python.org <Python_>`__) to your standalone copy of Spyder.
```

* Avoid triple-repeat of installation
* Be more concise/less redundant

For more information on this, see our :ref:`FAQ entry on the subject <using-packages-installer>`.

.. note::

>    The standalone installers currently do not yet support installing third-party Spyder plugins not already bundled with them, though this feature is currently under development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The standalone installers currently do not yet support installing third-party Spyder plugins not already bundled with them, though this feature is under development.
```

`currently` is said twice here.

Author: ```suggestion
   The standalone installers do not yet support installing third-party Spyder plugins not already bundled with them, though this feature is currently under development.
```

Yup, though its the other "currently" that should go, as "currently" and "do not yet" say the same thing.

.. _install-standalone:

=====================
Standalone installers
=====================

The standalone installers are our recommended method for most users on Windows and macOS, with experimental Linux support under active development.

> They work much like for any other IDE, where Spyder can be installed and updated independently of the Python environments you use to run your code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They work similar to any other IDE, where Spyder can be installed and updated independently of the Python environments you use to run your code.
```

Author: Technically, the revised version implies that the installers work similar to other IDEs themselves rather than those IDEs' _installers_. If we're going to go this route, may as well make it even simpler:

```suggestion
They work like any other IDE, where Spyder can be installed and updated independently of the Python environments you use to run your code.
```

Standalone installers
=====================

The standalone installers are our recommended method for most users on Windows and macOS, with experimental Linux support under active development.

> They work much like installing any other IDE, where Spyder can be installed and updated independently of the Python environments you use to run your code, avoiding problems with incompatible packages and botched installations that users often face when doing so within their own Python installation.

Author: Good point; should have thought of that. Implemented.

Running with Anaconda
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

   The bundled Spyder version can often be quite out of date, missing new features and bug fixes from the latest version, and if you install, change or remove other packages, there is a chance of dependency conflicts or a broken Spyder installation.
   Therefore, we recommend :ref:`installing Spyder into a new Conda environment <install-conda-installing>` to avoid all these issues.

To run the bundled version of Spyder after installing it with Anaconda, the recommended method on Windows is to launch it via the Start menu shortcut.
On other platforms, open Anaconda Navigator, scroll to Spyder under :guilabel:`Home` and click :guilabel:`Launch`.

.. image:: /images/installation/installation-anaconda-navigator.png
   :alt: Anaconda Navigator showing Spyder

If Spyder does not start via this method or you prefer to use the command line, open Anaconda Prompt (Windows) or your terminal (other platforms), type ``conda activate base`` then ``spyder``.

.. _install-conda-installing:

Installing with Conda
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

   If using Mamba/Mambaforge, substitute ``mamba`` for ``conda`` in the following commands.

> With Miniconda/Miniconda/Miniforge, or to get a more reliable and up-to-date Spyder version with Anaconda, Spyder should be installed into its own dedicated Conda environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Miniconda/Mambaforge/Miniforge, or to get a more reliable and up-to-date Spyder version with Anaconda, Spyder should be installed into its own dedicated Conda environment.
```

Author: ```suggestion
With Miniconda/Miniforge/Mambaforge, or to get a more reliable and up-to-date Spyder version with Anaconda, Spyder should be installed into its own dedicated Conda environment.
```

Good catch, but they should be in the correct order

.. _releases page: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/releases/latest

.. _install-standalone-running:

Running from a standalone install
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To run Spyder when installed standalone, you can simply use your operating system's typical method of launching applications, such as opening it from the :guilabel:`Start` menu on Windows (or the Taskbar, if you've pinned it there), or from Launchpad, Spotlight or the :guilabel:`Applications` folder on macOS (or the Dock, if you've added it there).

> On macOS, the first time you open Spyder, you may see a message that it cannot be opened because "the developer cannot be verified".
> If so, right-click on the application, select :guilabel:`Open`, then click :guilabel:`Open` in the resulting dialog, and the warning will no longer be shown.
> You can also click :guilabel:`Open Anyway` under :menuselection:`Security & Privacy --> General` in System Preferences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Our macOS installers are codesigned and notarized, so the user should never encounter this scenario.

Author: Thanks; I wasn't sure if this was still a possibility in some scenarios.

.. code-block:: shell

   conda create -c conda-forge -n spyder-env spyder numpy scipy pandas matplotlib sympy cython

For a minimal install without the optional functionality and integration with the above packages, you can instead run:

.. code-block:: shell

   conda create -c conda-forge -n spyder-env spyder

This installs Spyder into a new environment called ``spyder-env``, using the more up-to-date, community-run Conda-Forge channel.
To make sure future installs/updates in this environment also use Conda-Forge and are faster and more reliable, make sure to set it as your environment's default channel with strict channel priority enabled, if this isn't the case already (as it is with Miniforge/Mambaforge or if you've manually configured it):

.. code-block:: shell

   conda activate spyder-env
   conda config --env --add channels conda-forge
   conda config --env --set channel_priority strict

Here's a summary of the main steps.

.. image:: /images/installation/installation-conda-install.gif
   :alt: Running Spyder installation with conda

.. _install-conda-running:

Running with Conda
------------------

> You can then run Spyder by the same methods :ref:`as with Anaconda <install-anaconda-running>`, except make sure to launch the start menu shortcut with ``(spyder-env)`` in the name, select the ``spyder-env`` environment on the left before launching it with Navigator, or type ``conda activate spyder-env`` before launching it on the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can then run Spyder by the same methods :ref:`as with Anaconda <install-anaconda-running>`, except that you need to make sure to launch the Start menu shortcut with ``(spyder-env)`` in the name, select the ``spyder-env`` environment on the left before launching it with Navigator, or type ``conda activate spyder-env`` before launching it on the command line.
```

* I think this would make the sentence easier to read for non-native English speakers, although I'm not sure if it is correct.
* Start menu is capitalized in other places (and I think that's correct).

Author: Sure; its a little belabored, but it is perfectly correct and clearer to me as well :+1:

See :ref:`our FAQ question <using-existing-environment>` for more information about how to use Spyder with your existing Conda environments.

.. _install-conda-update:

Updating with Conda
-------------------

> With any Conda-based distribution and Spyder installed in its own environment (recommended), update Conda itself, active the environment then update Spyder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With any Conda-based distribution and Spyder installed in its own environment (recommended), update Conda itself, active the environment and finally update Spyder.
```

I think this is easier to read.

Author: Sure, just add a comma (Oxford or not) to be clearer about the sequence/semantics:

```suggestion
With any Conda-based distribution and Spyder installed in its own environment (recommended), update Conda itself, active the environment, and finally update Spyder.
```

In your system terminal (or Anaconda Prompt if on Windows), run:

.. code-block:: shell

   conda update -n base conda
   conda activate spyder-env
   conda update spyder

In case you get an error trying to update, just remove the existing environment (if using one other than ``base``):

.. code-block:: shell

   conda remove -n spyder-env --all

And then :ref:`recreate a fresh one <install-conda-installing>`.

.. _install-anaconda-base:

Anaconda base
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While we recommend always using a dedicated environment, with Anaconda you can also run the bundled copy of Spyder from the built-in ``base`` environment.

.. caution::

>    The bundled Spyder version can often be quite out of date, missing new features and bug fixes from the latest version, and if you install, change or remove other packages, there is a chance of dependency conflicts or a broken Spyder installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The bundled Spyder version can often be quite out of date, missing new features and bug fixes from the latest version, and if you install, change or remove other packages, there is an important chance of dependency conflicts or a broken Spyder installation.
```

To discourage people even more from using Spyder from the base env,

Author: "an important chance" doesn't make any semantic sense here in English. However, we can use a more appropriate word for emphasis:

```suggestion
   The bundled Spyder version can often be quite out of date, missing new features and bug fixes from the latest version, and if you install, change or remove other packages, there is a significant chance of dependency conflicts or a broken Spyder installation.
```

If so, right-click on the application, select :guilabel:`Open`, then click :guilabel:`Open` in the resulting dialog, and the warning will no longer be shown.
You can also click :guilabel:`Open Anyway` under :menuselection:`Security & Privacy --> General` in System Preferences.

.. _anaconda_install_ref:
.. _installation-conda:

==================
Anaconda/Miniconda
==================

Spyder is included by default in the `Anaconda`_ Python distribution, which comes with everything you need to get started in an all-in-one package, and can easily be installed in the much lighter-weight `Miniconda`_, which includes just Python and the Conda package and environment manager by default.

> This is our recommended installation method on Linux and for users needing third-party Spyder plugins, and supported on Windows and macOS too.

Author: I've substantially revised this in the current rewritten version, to avoid this clunkiness and clarify why the installer is recommended.

.. _Anaconda: https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution
.. _Miniconda: https://conda.io/miniconda.html

.. _installation-anaconda-running:

Running with Anaconda
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To run the bundled version of Spyder after installing it with Anaconda, the recommended method on Windows is to launch it via the Start menu shortcut.
On other platforms, open Anaconda Navigator, scroll to Spyder under ``Home``, and click ``Launch``.

.. image:: /images/installation/installation-anaconda-navigator.png
   :alt: Anaconda Navigator showing Spyder

If Spyder does not launch via this method or you prefer to use the command line, open Anaconda Prompt (Windows) or your terminal (other platforms), type ``conda activate base`` then ``spyder``.

.. note::

   The bundled Spyder version can often be quite out of date, missing new features and bug fixes from the latest version, and if you install, change or remove other packages, there is a chance of dependency conflicts or a broken Spyder installation.

>    We recommend :ref:`installing Spyder into a new Conda environment <installation-miniconda>` to avoid all these issues.

Author: Funny, I'm pretty sure I had that in an earlier draft, but removed it for some reason. Added it back.

.. _installation-miniconda:

Installing with Miniconda
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Once you download and install Miniconda, or to get a more reliable and up-to-date Spyder install with Anaconda, install Spyder into its own fresh environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you download and install Miniconda, or to get a more reliable and up-to-date Spyder version with Anaconda, we recommend installing Spyder into its own fresh environment.
```

* Avoid repeating `install` three times in this sentence.
* Mention explicitly that we recommend this.

Author: > Avoid repeating install three times in this sentence.

Yeah, I actually already rewrote this sentence to avoid that.

> Mention explicitly that we recommend this.

Reworded a bit, but I implemented the intent here

For a full install of Spyder and all optional dependencies, run the following command in your Anaconda Prompt (Windows) or terminal (other platforms):

.. code-block:: shell

   conda create -c conda-forge -n spyder-env spyder numpy scipy pandas matplotlib sympy cython

For a minimal install without the optional functionality and integration with the above packages, you can instead run:

.. code-block:: shell

   conda create -c conda-forge -n spyder-env spyder

> This installs Spyder into a new environment called ``spyder-env``, using the more up-to-date, community Conda-Forge channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will install Spyder into a new environment called ``spyder-env``, using the more up-to-date, community Conda-Forge channel.
```

I'm not sure if this correct. If not, please dismiss it.

Author: Either is perfectly valid, but "installs" is a bit more concise and direct, so I didn't end up applying this.

With ``virtualenvwrapper``:

.. code-block:: shell

   mkvirtualenv spyder-env
   workon spyder-env

Otherwise, on macOS/Linux/Unix:

.. code-block:: shell

   python3 -m venv spyder-env
   source spyder-env/bin/activate

or on Windows:

.. code-block:: batch

   python -m venv spyder-env
   spyder-env\Scripts\activate.bat

After activating your environment, to install Spyder and its optional dependencies, run:

.. code-block:: shell

   pip install spyder numpy scipy pandas matplotlib sympy cython

Or for a minimal installation, run:

.. code-block:: shell

   pip install spyder

.. image:: /images/installation/installation-pip-install.gif
   :alt: Running Spyder installation with pip

> To launch Spyder after installing, ensure your environment is activated and run the ``spyder`` or ``spyder3`` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To launch Spyder after installing it, ensure your environment is activated and run the ``spyder`` or ``spyder3`` command.
```

Seems missing.

Author: You _can_ get away with eliding it, but better to have it I guess

.. _install-updating:

===============
Updating Spyder
===============

> By default, Spyder checks for updates automatically on startup.
> You can also do manually with :menuselection:`Help --> Check for updates` on Windows and Linux, or :menuselection:`Spyder --> Check for updates` on macOS.

Author: ```suggestion
By default, Spyder checks for updates automatically on startup, and you can also check manually with :menuselection:`Help --> Check for updates`.
```

Updated this based on @mrclary 's input below.

> The :ref:`install-standalone` for Spyder 5.4.0+ also include update functionality built right into Spyder, which after checking for updates as above will display a prompt to automatically download and install the current version.

Author: @mrclary Is this true on macOS as well? Or did we not add that support in favor of just waiting for the `conda`- based installers? I can't remember the final outcome, sorry...

Reviewer 2: The menu selection on macOS is `Help --> Check for updates`, same as Windows and Linux (should it be different?).

And, yes, the update mechanism works on macOS. The only substantive difference is that macOS users will have to manually drag-and-drop the application.

Author: Oh, I thought the canonical location for update checks on macOS was the *<Application>* menu? Partially for that reason, I always thought it was really odd that it Windows applications typically put it under the `Help` menu of all places when I switched to Windows back when I was younger.

Anyway, I've applied a suggestion to update this.

By default, Spyder checks for updates automatically on startup.
You can also do manually with :menuselection:`Help --> Check for updates` on Windows and Linux, or :menuselection:`Spyder --> Check for updates` on macOS.

The :ref:`install-standalone` for Spyder 5.4.0+ also include update functionality built right into Spyder, which after checking for updates as above will display a prompt to automatically download and install the current version.
On earlier versions, you'll need to manually download and install the latest release (if on Windows, make sure to remove the old version first from Control Panel/System Settings).

If you installed Spyder through Anaconda, WinPython, MacPorts, or your system package manager, update using those same methods.
With Anaconda, just run (in Anaconda Prompt if on Windows, otherwise in your system terminal):
If you installed Spyder through Conda, WinPython, Homebrew, MacPorts, or your system package manager, update using those same methods, as described in their respective documentation.
With Conda-based installs, just run (in Anaconda Prompt if on Windows, otherwise in your system terminal):

.. code-block:: bash
.. code-block:: shell

>    conda update anaconda

Reviewer: Most of the time users get a package resolution conflicts without running `conda update anaconda` first. So, we should keep this command.

Furthermore, these commands could also fail sometimes with the same kind of error. In that case, they've told us they need to run

    conda remove spyder
    conda install spyder

Author: Well, that's only true of Anaconda, whereas `conda update anaconda` will generally fail with an error on the other three, as the `anaconda` metapackage will generally not be installed. And are you sure that workaround works reliably? Wouldn't it be better to just tell users to re-solve/re-create their environment (and probably faster too, because it avoids two resolution steps and a clean solve is much faster than an incremental one)?

Reviewer: > Well, that's only true of Anaconda

That's right. Then we'd need to differentiate at this point between updating Spyder in Anaconda and Miniconda, Miniforge, etc.

> And are you sure that workaround works reliably?

Yes, and it's also important to mention the second workaround I posted above.

> Wouldn't it be better to just tell users to re-solve/re-create their environment (and probably faster too, because it avoids two resolution steps and a clean solve is much faster than an incremental one)?

That's not a possibility for `base` and the problem with installing Spyder in other envs is that you have to connect it to `base` and keep track that the right version of Spyder-kernels is installed on it.

Author: Thanks:

* I thoroughly revised the Updating section to incorporate these improvements and others.
* It then was long enough that I re-organized it and split it into subsections per method to be easier to follow.
* It it turn occurred to me that it would make more sense just putting it under the respective top-level method headings, like the "Running Spyder" sections are, so everything for that method is in one place.
* That then motivated me to re-organize the Conda section into separate subsections for Conda envs and base Anaconda, and to put the former before the latter to further emphasize it.
* Finally, I also moved the "Alternative Methods" section below the pip section, as unlike pip they are third party and we don't control them at all, so better to make more clear that fact.

>    This command will also update all Spyder dependencies, so we recommend you use an isolated virtual environment to avoid any potential unintended effects on other installed packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This command will also update all Spyder dependencies, so we recommend you use an isolated conda environment to avoid any potential unintended effects on other installed packages.
```
